The theoretical rearticulation of structure as hegemony marked the work of Laclau and Mouffe as consequentially poststructuralist and offered perhaps the most important link between politics and poststructuralism in recent years (along with the work of Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak). The move from a structuralist account in which capital is understood to structure social relations in relatively homologous ways to a view of hegemony in which power relations are subject to repetition, convergence, and rearticulation brought the question of temporality into the thinking of structure, and marked a shift from a form of Althusserian theory that takes structural totalities as theoretical objects to one in which the insights into the contingent possibility of structure inaugurate a renewed conception of hegemony as bound up with the contingent sites and strategies of the rearticulation of power.
It is, of course, impossible in this context to reconstruct the particular way in which Derridas work and Foucaults work converge in the reconceptualization of hegemony that Laclau and Mouffe have offered. One of the points, however, that became most salient for me is the reintroduction of temporality and, indeed, of futurity into the thinking of social formations. Among many critical social theorists, the tendency has been to underscore how the systemic character of capital tends to incorporate any instance of opposition in the service of capitals own self-augmentation. I would clearly agree that the incorporative and domesticating possibilities of capital are immense. But I would also [End Page] argue that any theory that fails to think the possibilities of transformation from within that systemic formation is itself complicit with the idea of the eternal character of capital that capital so readily produces. Hegemony also marks a limit to the totalizing terms within which social formations are to be thought. For what hegemony attends to are the moments of breakage, of rearticulation, convergence, and resistance that are not immediately coopted by social formations in their past and present forms. That no social formation can endure without becoming reinstated, and that every reinstatement puts the structure in question at risk, suggests that the possibility of its own undoing is at once the condition of possibility of structure itself.
Before I knew the work of Laclau and Mouffe very well, I came close to this kind of insight in my work on gender. There I argued that gender is not an inner core or static essence, but a reiterated enactment of norms, ones which produce, retroactively, the appearance of gender as an abiding interior depth. My point as well was that although gender is constituted performatively, through a repetition of acts (which are themselves the encoded action of norms), it is not for that reason determined. Indeed, gender might be remade and restaged through the reiterative necessity by which it is constituted. Here I focused on the transposition of two Derridean insights into gender theory, mirroring what Laclau and Mouffe were doing within the theorization of hegemonic politics:  that the term that claims to represent a prior reality produces retroactively that priority as an effect of its own operation and) that every determined structure gains its determination by a repetition and, hence, a contingency that puts at risk the determined character of that structure. For feminism, that means that gender does not represent an interior depth, but produces that interiority and depth performatively as an effect of its own operation. And it means that patriarchy or systems of masculine domination are not systemic totalities bound to keep women in positions of oppression, but, rather, hegemonic forms of power that expose their own frailty in the very operation of their iterability. The strategic task for feminism is to exploit those occasions of frailty as they emerge.
But more recently, Laclau has offered another set of insights that converge in interesting ways with my own thinking. The first has to do with his enormously provocative claim that the essentially performative character of naming is the precondition for all hegemony and politics [xiv] (preface to The Sublime Object of Ideology by Slavoj Zizek). What is meant by performative here is of the utmost importance. For names do not merely bring into existence what they name, as divine names do. Names within the sphere of politics produce the possibility of identification, but also foil that possibility. To the extent that they are not descriptive (and, hence, for Laclau, not tied to established contents), they become the sites for a hegemonic rearticulation of subject positions. A name does not fully describe the subject that it nevertheless inaugurates into social space and time. But in what does its productive power consist, and what are the conditions of possibility for such power? Laclau refers to what remains undetermined in the subject through the power of the name, the referential limits of interpellation. What is it that constitutes the limitations of the performative power of naming? What is it, as it were, that holds the name open as a site of hegemonic articulation?